---
label: 3
title: "Female Bog Bodies: ‘Punishment’ and ‘Strange Fruit’"
subtitle: 
layout: essay
order: 103
class: page-one
contributor:
  # - id: ghiggins
abstract: 
---

_North_ received the most controversial reviews of Heaney's career; most focused on the bog poems, particularly 'Punishment'.The volume was hailed by Conor Cruise O'Brien as listening to 'the thing itself … the actual substance of historical agony and dissolution, the tragedy of a people in a place: the Catholics of Northern Ireland,'[^19] and tendentiously reviewed in the _Honest Ulsterman_ by Ciaran Carson who called Heaney 'the laureate of violence – a mythmaker, an anthropologist of ritual killing, an apologist for "the situation", in the last resort, a mystifier'.[^20]

Carson and Edna Longley were foremost amongst the critics who questioned Heaney's employment of Glob's photographs of the Danish bog bodies to address contemporary violence in Northern Ireland.[^21]

'Punishment' (_N_ 37-38) charts the speaker's response to the exhumed body of a young girl (Windeby I), presumed by Glob to have been killed for committing adultery.[^22]

[Photo of Windeby Girl] Asked by O'Driscoll if he had kept Glob's book open in front of him as he wrote the poems, Heaney replies that "There were a few of them—"Bog Queen" and "Punishment," in particular—where the information and speculation in the text were vital elements. (SS pg?)O'Driscoll follows up by asking ifthe difficulty with 'Punishment' was "more political than literary?" Heaney replies, "That's not how I would put it, because that makes it sound as if I were "addressing the situation in Northern Ireland." Admittedly I "addressed the situation" when I introduced different bog poems at readings and so on, although I now realize that it would have been better for the poems and for me and for everybody else if I had left them without that sort of commentary… (SS 157-159)" In Glob's description, the girl's head had been shaved, a blindfold placed on her eyes, and her body weighed down in the bog with branches and a large stone. He imagined her being "led naked out onto the bog with bandaged eyes . . . and drowned in the little peat pit, which must have held twenty inches of water or more."[^23] Many of these details remain in the vivid recreation of her punishment in the poem as the speaker actively places himself at the scene of her murder before imagining the girl back to life. His complex response to this eroticised female victim ranges from empathy ('I can feel the tug / of the halter'), to visualization ('I can see her drowned / body'), to tenderness ('Little adulteress'), to intimacy ('My poor scapegoat, / I almost love you') (_N_ 37-38).

The uneasy conflict between tribal loyalties and personal intimacy suggested by this juxtaposition of 'scapegoat' and 'almost-love' is furthered by Heaney's introduction of the biblical story of the woman condemned for adultery in the Christian Gospel of St. John. When the speaker declares that he "would have cast . . . the stones of silence," he evokes Christ's words to the crowd gathered to stone the woman, "He that is without sin among you. Let him first cast a stone at her. (John 8:7)" The biblical crowd disperses but Heaney's speaker accuses himself of a more complex crime, implying that his inaction or silence renders him just as culpable as the vengeful spectators. He compounds this sense of complicity with the self-recriminatory line, 'I am the artful voyeur / of your brain's exposed / and darkened combs' (_N_ 38). Here Heaney confronts the queasy sense of covert sexual pleasure implicit in his earlier descriptions of the girl's frail naked body and exposed nipples. Is his voyeurism more or less reprehensible if it is in the service of 'art', if the nipples are described as "amber beads"? Is such scrutiny more or less objectionable when his gaze shifts from her sexualised body to her exposed brain, muscles and "numbered bones"? In viewing the body of the girl, Heaney also records her transformation from ancient corpse to exhibit or aesthetic object. Her "numbered bones"[^24] evoke the classification systems of both forensic analysis (of crime scenes) and museums, conflating the violent context of her death with her cultural afterlife.[^25]

Most of the negative critical attention focused on the last two stanzas of the poem in which Heaney compares the ritual killing of the ancient 'little adulteress' with the tarring and feathering of women who became involved with British soldiers in 1970s Northern Ireland, "I who have stood dumb/when your betraying sisters,/cauled in tar,/wept by the railings." (_N_ 38). In this jolt from the Iron Age to the contemporary period, Heaney undercuts the idea that 'standing dumb' or 'bystanding' is somehow a neutral or dispassionate act. This is the most shocking of the contemporary acts of atrocity evoked in these poems, partly because the speaker seems to have actually witnessed the tarring and feathering of these women and is calibrating his response in real time. The equivalent moment in 'The Grauballe Man' occurs at the end of the poem when Heaney places the "actual weight/of each hooded victim/slashed and dumped" on the scales of "beauty and atrocity." (_N_ ) Although this is a jarring reminder of the ugliness of 'actual' violence as opposed to the "too strictly compassed" work of art, the metaphoric scales consign these victims to a more abstract realm than the 'railings' of 'Punishment.' While it is highly unlikely that Heaney himself stood by the railings and witnessed one of these horrifying acts of brutality, the impression of immediacy is substantiated by the discovery of a newspaper cutting among his working papers showing one such victim.[^26]

[Link to cutting]There were several accounts of these violent acts against women published in the months in which Heaney worked on the poem and it is unclear which newspaper carried this photograph.[^27] As a result, the girl in the newspaper photograph remains anonymous, and she also becomes one of several "betraying sisters" rather than a singular figure mirroring the tenderly evoked "little adulteress" from the ancient past.

In an interview with Henri Cole in the _Paris Review_ in 1997, Heaney talks about the "element of self-accusation, which makes the poem personal in a fairly acute way," and adds yet another unseen context to his discussion of the poem, "It's a poem about standing by as the IRA tar and feather these young women in Ulster. But it's also about standing by as the British torture people in barracks and interrogation centres in Belfast. About standing between those two forms of affront."[^28]

Twenty years after the poem's publication, Heaney here seems to want to redress the balance of accusations about 'barbaric' and 'civilized' forms of torture, echoing the contentious lines addressed to Tacitus in 'Kinship,' "Read the inhumed faces/of casualty and victim; report us fairly,/how we slaughter/for the common good." (_N_ )

The three time frames of 'Punishment' – pagan/anthropological, Christian/religious, and modern/political – stage Heaney's ethical dilemma about his own artistic practice and his personal culpability. Heaney's use of these framing devices is further illuminated by examining the drafts of the poem which show many variations in form, style, and time period during the process of composition.

DRAFTS: [Digital display]

While the drafts show that the opening stanzas of the poem remain largely unchanged, one version experiments with the sonnet form, another reveals the alternative title, 'Shame,'[^29] but gradually the lines become shorter and the poem lengthens into its final form. These drafts also depict how Heaney wrestled with some of the poem's most striking lines about the complicity of the speaker with those who would condemn and punish the girl. The earliest versions include references to "Senate and althing," the abstract officialdom of the state personified in the figure of the "groomed proconsul" whose "civilized disdain for you and yours" is measured against the "tribe's exact and intimate revenge".[^30] Heaney here conflates pagan and Christian time frames and, with the speaker, claims that "all might cast the stones of silence" in condemnation of the girl. Significantly, in changing "We all might cast," to "I would have cast, I know," he places himself in the dock and no longer outsources judgement to official sources.

The body of the girl, like the Christ-like Tollund Man, is initially revered by the speaker as he imagines observing the spectacle of its public display. However, Heaney gradually erases religious references from the poem including words and phrases such as "atoning," "soiled halo," "scourge," "rend my garments, as if without sin," and "palm leaf." In removing this language, Heaney desacralizes the body and restores her flawed humanity to the long-dead girl.

Indeed, the shift in the relationship between the speaker and the girl evoked in the self-accusatory line, 'I am the artful voyeur /of your brain's exposed /and darkened combs' (_N_ 38) follows several revealing drafts of the poem in which the speaker accuses himself of being a 'cowardly spy' and a 'posthumous collaborator' in her punishment. The word 'collaborator' has a particular resonance in this context since the public shaming of women by tarring and feathering them was associated not only with perceived sexual betrayal, but also with informing or collaborating with the British army or police force. Indeed, another possible source for Heaney's poem is a photograph published in the _Listener_ in May 1972, of a 15 year old girl, beaten, tarred, and feathered by the Official IRA for "providing info to the RUC Special Branch." (NSS, 190). Thus, while the presumed adultery of the Windeby Girl aligns with the sexual policing of her "betraying sisters," other forms of betrayal and other forms of surveillance are also at stake. The charge of collaboration in the drafts is a free-floating accusation that moves between the speaker and the girl but is absent in the poem's final form. Instead, Heaney focuses on the speaker's personal moral position, using the verb "connive" rather than "collaborate," and problematizes the idea of his "civilised outrage" while claiming to "understand" the community or tribe of tormentors validating this "intimate revenge".

Nathan Suhr-Sytsma usefully complicates the vexed question of whether Heaney (in the guise of his speaker) legitimizes the violence meted out to these women by suggestingthat the poem might "be less about condoning 'intimate revenge' than about the speaker's discomfort with assuming a position of journalistic impersonality from which to condemn such revenge, a discomfort with the "cowardly spy" who reports on the death of those tarred and feathered during the Troubles as opposed to the "artful voyeur" who attempts to understand that he himself is an observer of this predicament" (Suhr-Sytsma 193). Certainly, in the final version of 'Punishment,' the ambiguity of 'artful' combined with 'voyeur' resonates throughout the poem and beyond as Heaney weighs up his own role as culpable bystander and as tribal witness.

{% backmatter %}

## Notes

[^19]: Conor Cruise O'Brien, 'A Slow North-East Wind', _The Listener_ (25 September 1975), 404-405.

[^20]: Ciaran Carson, 'Escaped from the Massacre?' _The Honest Ulsterman_ 50 (1975): 183-186.

[^21]: Edna Longley, 'North: "Inner Émigré" or "Artful Voyeur"?' in Tony Curtis (ed.), _The Art of Seamus Heaney_ (Dufour Editions: 1985), pp. 65-95.

[^22]: More recent DNA testing has shown that the body (dated to between 41 BCE and 118 CE) is actually that of a sixteen-year-old boy.

[^23]: (pg ref?)

[^24]: Neil Corcoran suggests that the phrase is derived from one of the psalms in the Catholic liturgy, "They have pierced my hands and feet; they have numbered all my bones". (Corcoran, pg 73)

[^25]: REF: Melanie Giles, 'Disquieting Exhibits: Displaying the Dead' in _Bog Bodies: Face to Face with the Past (_Manchester University Press, 2020) [https://www.manchesteropenhive.com/view/9781526150196/9781526150196.00014.xml](https://www.manchesteropenhive.com/view/9781526150196/9781526150196.00014.xml) See "When faced with violent or mysterious death, and the uncanny properties of a bog body, this is no mean feat. Sanders ([2009](https://www.manchesteropenhive.com/view/9781526150196/9781526150196.00016.xml#ref-574): 19) lauds Glob's own endeavour here, arguing that he 'sutures the dissected body through poetic and photographic glossing', achieving 'almost a re-embalming'. - Where does this belong in the chapter?

[^26]: Ref specific cutting: Seamus Heaney Papers, Stuart A. Rose Library, **MSS 960 Box 74 FF 8** ("Tarred and shaven: Girl who dared love a British soldier. Bogside, 1971") and find out some stats about the frequency of these "punishments." See also [https://www.nytimes.com/1971/11/11/archives/ulster-women-tar-2-girls-for-dating-british-soldiers-two-girls.html](https://www.nytimes.com/1971/11/11/archives/ulster-women-tar-2-girls-for-dating-british-soldiers-two-girls.html)Note how this article emphasizes that it is women who are doling out this punishment. Looks like the same photo from the Heaney papers - Link to this. See Don Beaudette

[^27]: Nov. 11, 1971 - Teenage girl tarred and feathered: A teenage girl had her hair shaved off before being tarred and feathered in the Bogside area of Londonderry yesterday. It was her punishment for going out with a soldier. It was the second similar incident in the Bogside within a week and followed a warning by the women's section of the IRA that girls who continued to fraternize with British soldiers would be tarred and feathered. The 19 year old girl was left tied to a lamp post. Women in the crowd shouted Soldier Lover. (Credit Image: Keystone Pictures USA/ZUMAPRESS) See also Ruth McDonald, "Has Northern Ireland left the past behind?" (27 November, 2009) [http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk\_news/northern\_ireland/8381652.stm](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/northern_ireland/8381652.stm). Took photo of back of cutting to help identify.

[^28]: Henri Cole, "Seamus Heaney: The Art of Poetry," _Paris Review,_ No. 75, Issue 144, Fall 1997, 115.

[^29]: Seamus Heaney, MS 49, 493/37, NLI.

[^30]: See also https://bostonreview.net/articles/roger-boylan-intimate-revenge-the-troubles-ireland/

{% endbackmatter %}
